Genetic information is encoded in DNA, but the expression of this information depends on the accessibility of DNA to the transcriptional machinery. Chemical modifications to histone proteins, around which DNA is wrapped, affect its accessibility and transcription. Over the past few decades, several such modifications, or epigenetic marks, have been identified and characterized — including acetylation, methylation and phosphorylation of histones. These marks are added by ‘writer’ enzymes, removed by ‘eraser’ enzymes and recognized by ‘reader’ proteins that mediate downstream cellular responses. Levels of epigenetic marks often fluctuate during a cell’s life or in response to external stimuli, but having them in the wrong place at the wrong time can alter gene-expression programs, erroneously turning genes on and off and leading to health conditions. Writing in Nature, Zheng et al.1 characterize an epigenetic mark found in neurons and explore its role in regulating behavioural patterns.

Using conventional cell models to study histone modifications has been the focus of epigenetic research for years, but to study them in neurons is particularly challenging. It was not until 2019 that pioneering studies identified molecules that are typically considered to be chemical messengers in the brain — the monoamines serotonin and dopamine — as sources of histone modifications2,3. How the epigenetic machinery regulates these monoamine-derived histone modifications remained unclear.

In the current work, Zheng et al. established the role of an epigenetic mark derived from histamine — a monoamine molecule that modulates neuronal function — in neuronal signalling. The authors show that the addition of a histaminyl group (histaminylation) to the fifth glutamine amino-acid residue of histone H3 (H3Q5) is ‘written’ by an enzyme called transglutaminase 2 (TG2).

The authors find that TG2 acts not only as a writer but also an eraser. Because TG2 can both write and erase epigenetic marks, it essentially functions as an ‘exchanger’ enzyme, mediating the switch between histone histaminylation, serotonylation and dopaminylation. The exchange mechanism involves a chemical reaction in which a cysteine amino-acid residue of TG2 reacts with H3Q5, forming an intermediate compound that reacts with the amino group of the monoamine neurotransmitter — yielding a monoaminylated H3Q5. Mutating the cysteine of TG2 disabled this reaction, confirming that this residue is essential for TG2’s exchange activity. This is the first time such an exchanger enzyme has been reported, and it expands the network of known epigenetic players beyond writers, erasers and readers. Whether other exchanger enzymes exist is a topic ripe for further investigation.

Modification of the fourth lysine residue of histone H3 (H3K4) with methyl groups is a widespread epigenetic mark associated with transcriptional activation. Because lysine 4 is adjacent to glutamine 5, the site at which histaminylation occurs, Zheng and colleagues explored whether there is any functional crosstalk between these sites. They found that histaminylated H3Q5 (H3Q5his) prevents the writer enzyme MLL1 from methylating H3K4 (resulting in a mark called H3K4me). Furthermore, unlike serotonylated H3Q5 (H3Q5ser), which enhances the binding of the reader protein WDR5 to histone H34,5, H3Q5his decreases WDR5 binding.

The authors proposed that repulsion between the positively charged histaminyl group and a positively charged lysine residue of WDR5’s H3-binding pocket is responsible for the decreased binding, and mutations that were made in WDR5 confirmed this speculation. Mutant WDR5 was found in high levels at regions of the genome that were rich in H3Q5his, and this co-localization correlated with the increased expression of genes in these locations.

The only brain region that is rich in histamine-releasing neurons is the hypothalamic tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN). The authors found that H3Q5his was enriched in this brain region. Because the TMN is involved in the circadian rhythm — the body’s internal clock that controls when in a 24-hour period certain physiological functions occur — Zheng et al. next investigated whether neurons in the TMN show rhythmic gene expression, and whether this depends on H3Q5his.

Genomic analysis of mouse TMN tissue collected at regular intervals over a 24-hour period revealed rhythmic gene expression patterns, and striking fluctuations in levels of H3Q5his. The highest levels were detected when mice were awake and active, and the lowest when mice were inactive. Notably, these fluctuations were particularly prominent in clock genes, which encode proteins that control the circadian rhythm. Furthermore, when Zheng et al. treated active mice with a sedative to artificially induce the inactive phase, levels of H3Q5his, H3Q5ser and WDR5 were reduced across the genome and especially at a set of clock genes that are regulated by the transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1.

Do monoaminylated H3Q5 marks have a causal role in circadian rhythm? Zheng et al. introduced a mutant version of histone H3 that lacks glutamine 5 and therefore cannot be modified with monoamine groups into TMN neurons of mice. Although rhythmic gene expression was seen in a large set of genes (including established circadian genes) in mice expressing normal H3, transcriptional rhythmicity was lost in the mutant samples. Finally, the authors examined animal behaviour: locomotor activity was assessed by measuring the distance that mice travelled in their cages throughout the day. Mice with mutant H3 showed impaired locomotor activity during the day and a considerable locomotory deficit in transitions between active and inactive phases.

Zheng and colleagues shed light on a complex histaminylation-dependent mechanism through which the TMN controls circadian rhythms (Fig. 1). Several questions remain for future research. Do glutamine sites other than H3Q5 undergo histaminylation? What is the effect of neighbouring epigenetic marks, other than H3K4me, on histaminylation and vice versa? How does H3Q5his affect binding and activities of the extensive family of writers, erasers and readers that are specific to H3K4me?

 A region of the brain called the tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) is involved in circadian rhythm, the body’s 24-hour internal clock. This region is rich in neurons that release the neurotransmitter molecule histamine. Zheng et al.1 show that histamine can modify DNA-packaging histone proteins, producing an epigenetic mark that influences gene expression and behaviour. The enzyme transglutaminase 2 (TG2) can act as a ‘writer’, adding a histaminyl group to the fifth glutamine residue of histone H3 (producing a mark called H3Q5his). When mice are awake and in their active phase, levels of H3Q5his across the genome are high. b, TG2 also removes H3Q5his, acting as an ‘eraser’. When mice are in their inactive phase, levels of H3Q5his are low. Zheng and colleagues find that rhythmic fluctuations in H3Q5his correlate with the rhythmic expression of genes that control the circadian rhythm.

When intracellular concentrations of monoamines are insufficient for monoaminylation, TG2 was found to catalyse the conversion of histaminylated glutamine (H3Q5his) to a glutamate residue (H3E5). This conversion is drastic because the charge at this position flips from positive (histaminylated glutamine) to negative (glutamate), and H3E5 can no longer be modified with monoamines. Therefore, the physiological and disease outcomes associated with this phenomenon need to be explored.

The most challenging direction for research in the future will be to characterize how H3Q5his and H3Q5ser are linked to antidepressant medications6 and sensory-processing behaviours7, and how dopaminylated H3Q5 is involved in addiction and behavioural adaptability3. Addressing these issues will broaden scientists’ understanding of the link between dynamic epigenetic processes in the brain and the pathways that dictate behaviour.